I guess, in other words, the jobs will be here for
the people who moved in, whereas in the past, those
jobs have not been here. We have 8,000 jobs, plus
probably 1,000 construction jobs. So it's 9,000
jobs and probably 10,000 or 12,000 houses. So we
almost have a job for every dwelling unit. And a
third of the people who live here work here. OK, I
was wondering what the numbers were. And the other
2 thirds, a third will go downtown, and the other
third scatters. uh and i don't think we'll
probably ever get much more than half but i think
then that when people commute out of here downtown
somebody will be commuting in from yeah
philadelphia that's okay yeah what about your
transportation though is the future of
transportation in this i mean to the outside world
airports the uh we have a cold road yeah we have uh
you know the woodlands express which is an
excellent bus system from our park and ride lot,
which has just been expanded, I think, to 800 or
1,000 cars. And there's vans and buses leave from
there every morning for people who leave their car
here and do want to park in. Are you all talking rail
service at all through here at all? Yeah. Rail
takes the kind of density that we don't have out
here and probably won't have. Is that right? I
mean, if they did a high-speed rail from Dallas to
Houston and had a stop right here at I-45, I'm sure
some people would get on and go downtown. But it
would not be supported. No, rail is pretty
restricted, unless you've got a density like New
York or downtown Atlanta or something.
I don't know. Missouri caught the train. The
airport caught the train to town. Europe said,
we're not going to spend our money. It's an
incredible world. It is, and it could be here. It
could be here. It may not be where we want. This city
spends $1 billion a year in the Houston area fixing
up highways so people can get out one car at a time
and drive back and forth. If they took some of that
billion dollars a year of new highway
construction or refurbished highways or widened
highways or fixed the bridges and devoted it to
rail and spent the money on rail, But again, the
accountant mentality says if you're going to have
a rail, it's got to pay for itself. Yeah, right.
Well, the highway construction isn't paying for
itself. That's right. Yeah, the automobile
industry is one of the most subsidized industries
in the country in that sense. You give them a free
place to drive. If you gave the railroad company
free tracks, then people probably could afford to
ride on the train. But you want them to buy the land,
build the tracks, run the things, And you won't
give them a subsidy, you want them to make a profit.
Well, that's a pretty poor business, it turns out.
Now there's an alternative. Before there were
cars, of course, railroads were wonderfully
profitable for everybody, because you either got
on the train or you rode your horse. So you got on the
train. The railroaders made a lot of money. I've
got a couple of questions that are really
different. How does your job as planner and
George, or we've been told, or at least have been
given the impression that George Mitchell is
something of a visionary in terms of the
development of the Woodlands. How do you work
together, or how does that come together, his
vision, if that's, you know, if you would do that?
George has gone to Europe and seen new towns.
George came to Columbia, Maryland, saw what we did
there. George envisioned doing a community here
that was done right. Right yet to be defined. He
liked what we all said when we started planning it
and what right would be. And he supported it with
hard cash and staff against lots of critics who
said this wasn't the way to invest his money. In
fact, we lost one company president the energy
division and said, let's just stick in energy and I
don't want to have anything to do with real estate.
Well, I do, because I think we should put back into
America some of what we're taking out. And I've
always said this on George's behalf, that I think
that he wants the Woodlands to be a role model for
how the next America could be built in the next
centuries. that instead of sprawling
subdivisions around the urban centers of
America, you could have new communities that take
a lesson from the environment that's created
here. We have the opportunity, and it's still to be
undertaken, but we have people growing up in this
lifestyle, and it ought to be measured against
maybe 1960, where you got suburban sprawl,
traffic congestion, ugly signs. I mean, what
about the health and well-being of the people in
that spot versus here? Is there really a
difference? Are people more sick in one place or
the other? Or is there stress on the human
condition? One of the things I say, our
environment reduces the stress on the human
condition. It leaves you with a reservoir that
makes you able better to cope with the other
things, marital stress, job stress. children's
stress. But on top of all of those stresses, your
stress getting to and from work gets visually
bombarded with blight and ugliness and traffic
congestion and the insecurity of, like you say,
people live five blocks in of 1960 and it goes for 20
blocks. And they sit in their house and the cars
come and go. They don't know who the hell's in the
car. They see a car parked in the street and say,
whose car is that? I don't recognize that car. You
take somebody to the woodlands and they sit on
their cul-de-sac and everybody knows whose car
belongs there. There's nobody running by that
they have to worry about. You've taken some
anxiety off their security issue. Those things
may all add up and be meaningful. I don't know.
Somebody's got to measure that. Maybe you need to
take 10,000 or 20,000 people to the woodlands in
that geographic area and compare it with 20,000
people in the 1960 area. Those are both come off off
the I-45 corridor, same distance in from
downtown, and measure what's happening between
those two groups of people. Anything
significant? I don't know. That would be a
delightful cross project to do. How does the, what
I'm trying to get at though, is how does the synergy
of the woodlands develop?
In other words, does Mr. Mitchell have concept,
idea, image? Do you then take concept, idea,
image, and as you say, hardline it? Or in fact, did
you create concept, idea, and image from
something much more hazy? In other words, how does
it develop? I think George Mitchell He was one of
the most remarkable guys I've ever met in my life. I
had my own company for 25 years. I said I would be
crazy to ever sell my company and go to work for
somebody else. But George Smith was probably one
of the few people in the country I would do that for.
He had the concept of the Houston Advanced
Research Center pulling together the
universities to get grant research going, to get
technology going. in Texas instead of having it go
to Massachusetts and California and everything.
Do creative ideas here. He envisioned and made it
happen. He envisioned building a model community
here and he went and visited a whole bunch of them,
including Columbia and Irvine. And he got the
people who were responsible for both and brought
them, brought us here and said, let's, let's do it
right. Let's, you know, Here are the tools it
takes. And he's been supportive of doing it. When I
told him we needed a pavilion, we agreed. And back
in 83, we spent $350,000 doing early planning
studies. We put his money where the idea was. He
said, yes, we do need it. And then he and Cynthia got
together and said, let's, when the recession was
over here, he said, let's get Dick to get the
pavilion going again. And we started out very
modestly, like, how about $1 million? How about $4
million? Well, we're up to $10 million. And we're
still going. We've got another half a million in
next year. I think it's going to get better every
year. He has great faith and vision in that he's
building for things that will be far beyond his
lifetime. And he cares about that. I don't know if
you know what he's doing in Galveston. I've been
reading about it. He's almost single-handedly
saving that island from the doldrums. He's
brought back the Strand to the grandeur of the
1890s. Are you involved in any of that? My vice
president for planning. I've given him the
Galveston project because I'm than what I have to
do here in the Colorado project. Are you doing a ski
area? That's great. It's exciting. It's obvious
that the Woodlands Corporation, which Mr.
Richmond enjoined us to call it rather than just
the Woodlands, is also branching out into other
areas beyond the Woodlands. Well, we have 60,000
acres of real estate, and 25 of it is the Woodlands.
So we've got more real estate outside the
Woodlands. Some of it is what I call Woodlands 2,
and some of Woodlands is west of here. You know,
somebody will do it in the next century, but the
market's not there yet until we're built out, and
then they can go do another one, or a smaller one.
But we happen to have 1,800 acres near Aspen, which
we developed into what's called Owl Creek. And
while I was up doing that, as project director for
that, I found this property of 3,200 acres near
Steamboat Springs and convinced George we should
buy into that and create a joint venture with the
Steamboat Ski Area to do a total resort,
year-round resort there with a major ski mountain
and there's a 500-acre lake on it. Great golf
potential and so forth for the resort community.
And the Mitchell companies and now the Woodlands
Corporation does a lot of resort properties. We
have Cape Royale up at Lake Livingston. We have
Point Venture at Lake Travis. We've got several
projects down in Galveston, the Galveston
Country Club, Pirates Beach, Sunbird.
But we do a lot of resort type communities. So the
Lake Catamount project, although that's really
the biggest one, is also a resort. So that's not a
new word for us. We use the building in running golf
courses and resort hotels and second home
communities. So that's kind of second nature to
us, whether we can carry Lake Catamount forward.
Yet or not, I don't know. I've gotten zoning there
for nearly 4,000 dwelling units. We've got a ski
mountain for 12,000 skiers a day. And we're in the
final throes of a four-year environmental impact
statement. Of course, the $1.5 million worth of
studies, we'll know by Christmas whether we've
got it. Are you adjoining national forest lands or
anything? Yeah, the ski area is on the national
forest lands. And it's taken four years to get
through there.
But anyway,
I'm sure you can tell I really believe that we have a
statement here that's worthy of national
attention. I think what we're doing in creating
environments for lives is an advancement of our
civilization. If we could only spread these goals
and how to achieve them, so that more developers
would band together and do bigger, more
diverse-type projects where you could put
together the bits and pieces to have a society. You
know, we've got churches here. George has put in a
private school that's at another dimension. We
have daycare centers. We've got 41 lakes we've
built so far here. We're all very natural in
respecting the environment and enhancing the
environment. Our wildflower program, which
George insists on funding, again, why do you want
to spend $35,000 every year on wildflower seeds?
But we want this place in the spring to be awash with
flowers. It's just another way of man and nature
enjoying one another. The color here in the spring
is just gorgeous. Well, it should be interesting
to see if this, in fact, becomes a prototype for it.
Yeah. Well, I think it will. It'll always be
honored for being a better place in Houston to
live. Yeah, right, nothing else. And I worry a
little bit because I grew up next to Radburn, New
Jersey, which was done by Clarence Stein, an
architect out of New York in the early 30s, and it
fell during the Depression. And it still has a
waiting list of people to get in. It never got
finished because it went bankrupt, but they had
open space and pathways and parks. similar to what
we have in our villages, as a matter of fact. And I
can read here, if you think the woodlands is good,
you can go to Tapiola in Finland outside of
Helsinki and see a new town that was built in the
50s. It's every bit as good as what we've done. And
that's a poor country, Finland. And so people do.
There is a common denominator between the
different cultures of people. given the
opportunity, we'll produce the same kind of
thing. Socio-economic mix of housing in the
forest, close to nature, providing stimulation,
providing recreation, providing education,
giving people a chance to optimize their
environment and the quality of their lives. And
it's sad to see that 99% of the housing that gets
built in the United States is just shelters being
thrown on 20 acres here and 40 acres there. and we
spread people in a thin veneer across the
countryside without any pattern or organization
of their life support systems. It's really cruel,
and that's why the New Communities Act was such a
fine idea. Why can't we organize the economic and
demographic forces of this country such that we
promote community development instead of
suburban sprawl bedroom communities? That's not
right. We can do better than that. The
environments that we're studying so hard now to
put on a space platform are what we should be doing
for our everyday living. Why don't we put the same
effort into that as we are for spacewalking or
space orbit, orbital living? Probably we're
going to learn things up there that will bring back
that. Well, they are learning the psychology of
living, I guess, and part of what's going on.
That's exactly right. That's a very good
overview. Don, do you have any other thoughts we
ought to... Put yourself in our shoes for a minute,
or whoever's shoes you may be wearing. One of the
things that Mr. Mitchell wanted us to do was to
concentrate on the last six to eight years and the
future. What events, what ideas, what
developments, initiatives are going to matter
the most that have happened in the last half dozen,
eight, ten years? Okay, the creation of HARC,
which is spawning high technology jobs, not only
for the Woodland, but for the Houston region, and
bringing in bright minds and families to work and
live here. People who are committed and
appreciate the quality of life and will help
support it. Creation of a private school, provide
for those same kind of people who are really
oriented toward making sure their kids get a jump
start toward the technology of the future, which
is going to require a lot tougher academic
achievement than most people allow their kids to
get away without.
I think the cultural maturing of the cultural And
the festive side of the woodlands is maturing. The
pavilion has been a big recent addition to that.
Yeah, it sure has. We've
got a good program. Yeah. If I could just
summarize. I have to backtrack a little bit. Sure.
I think in the last recent years, the most
important thing is that PARCC was brought on and
has been successful in generating the interest in
the university support that it has, and now in
research. and high-quality, high-tech jobs in
industry and the development of industries for
the future. But the venture capital group that was
formed, again, with Georgia's seed money that now
takes some of that research and finds the
commercially viable projects and spawns new
companies, creates new jobs, which some of them
might take off and be really important to the
Houston and Texas economy. I think the private
school adds a dimension to help attract the finer
minds. You know, at Park they're doing particle
research and laser research and things that are at
the front edge of where our society is going,
technically, and the computer setup that they
have there. Those things are all fantastic. And
then simple things like interfaith and the
religious community that's evolved in the
Woodlands and all the churches and the fact that
the school system has supported us in adding
schools as they're needed. And I used to say also
another important thing, too, is we can plan and
strive to build an environment or an envelope for
people to come and put their lives in. When we're
done, the success of the Woodlands is going to
depend a lot on just who moves here. Because in the
long run, it's the quality of the people that are
here and how they work together to build a
community and have an allegiance to themselves to
make a better place. And I think we can give them a
head start by giving them something that's
functionally better. The
people that come here are really important. I
think the future is is the expansion of the town
center, both through the mall, the Lake Robins
business complex that's right next to the mall,
the canal down to the pavilion, and the kind of
generation of cultural, recreational, and
commercial activities that can have, which can
rival San Antonio in the future, which brings them
12 million visitors a year, where Tivoli Garden in
Copenhagen brings 12, 15 million people from
Europe during the three or four month summer
season. Our canal from the pavilion to Lake Robins
can be a destination place for the whole country to
come. And I think these are things to do for the
future that can build in this whole business
complex that we really become the northern
satellite hub of Houston right here in the
wilderness. That sounds exciting. We appreciate
your time and interview very much.